Talia Martz-OberlanderPHY3009 Project ProposalOctober 30th 2015Tiffany TimbersEffects of Carbon Dioxide on Pitch of a Pipe OrganIntroduction      Sound travels via the movement of air, which means that the characteristics and composition of air affect the speed of sound. Therefore, studying the effects of atmospheric conditions such as the molecular composition of air can provide insights into the nature of sound travel.1 Examining the speed at which sound travels greatly affects aspects of music, including: instrument construction, management, and use. Many mechanical instruments are adjusted to emit certain frequency sound waves. Since sound speed is affected by the medium of travel, the environmental conditions of buildings that house instruments greatly affect their sound. Cramer has documented the relationship between changes of sound speed and air characteristics such as: temperature, relative humidity (RH), and CO2 concentration.2 Furthermore, the frequency of sound waves has a calculable relationship to these environmental factors. These calculations can provide insight into how much musical pitch is affected by different characteristics of ambient air.      Mechanical pipe organs are especially vulnerable to changes in their environment because they are often located in large, heterogeneous buildings. Additionally, the pipe and bellow system moves air throughout different parts of the chambers mixing air from different parts of the building. These situational variables can affect tuning of some pipes relative to others making the instrument sound out of tune. Furthermore, tuning adjustments are completed when the room is empty, however the organ is played when the building is filled with an audience whose breath produces significant amounts of CO2. Carbon dioxide is a heavier and more massive than other compounds that make up air, including N2 and O2. Therefore, its presence affects calculations of molar mass of air, particularly with high levels of air moisture, as is caused by breathing .3,4 How much does the frequency of the notes change with environmental differences between conditions during tuning versus during performance? Additionally, will the tuning of different sections of the organ change in relation to others, based on regional differences? This study looks to examine CO2 concentration in a chapel containing a mechanical organ to examine the relationship between CO2 and speed of sound propagated from organ pipes.Methods       This study utilizes data that chart concentration of CO2 and pitch of notes played on an organ at St. Paul’s School in Concord NH, collected by Dr. Ian Hoffman. Computational analysis of the data will make use of the mathematical relationship between CO2 concentration and changes to the speed of sound, as described by Cramer.2       The data I will use was collected and recorded using Onset® U12-03 and Telaire 7001 HOBO® data logging devices for temperature and relative humidity (RH) and for CO2 (ppm) readings, respectively. Currently, the data primarily exists in Hoboware (.hobo) files and will be converted to plain text format for processing. Using Python will aid in cleaning the data so it can be more easily processed for computation, quantitative analysis, statistical significance calculation, and graphical presentation. 	Useful metadata consists of temperature and RH measurements taken at the same time, with the same sensors, in the same locations as CO2 concentration, as well as temperature readings outside the chapel. Additional meteorological information from nearby weather stations could be used. Expected Outcomes/Significance	Analyzing data of CO2 concentration can provide insight into pitch change of an organ when played in environments of varying carbon dioxide concentration. This knowledge can lead to optimal instrument tuning to account for changes in pitch due to varying CO2 concentrations when the mechanic adjusts the frequency of sound relative to when an organist plays for an audience. More broadly, this study will link the change in frequency of sound waves, or the speed of sound, from changes in the amount of COz in partially enclosed environments. References1 O. A. Godein. “Passive acoustic measurements of wind velocity and sound speed in air”. Journal of Acoustical Society of America. 135(2); El68-EL74 (February, 2014).2 O. Cramer. “Specific heat ratio and speed of sound”. Journal of Acoustical Society of America. 95(3); 2510-2516 (1992).3 A. Picard, R. S. Davis, M. Glaser, and K. Fujii. “Revised formula for the density of moist air (CIPM-2007)”. Meterologia ; 45; 149-155 (2008). 4 R. S. Davis. “Equation for the Determination of the Density of Moist Air (1981/91).” Meterlogia; 29; 67-70 (1992).